

                                                  UNIT-2 
 The  data  link  layer  needs  to  pack  bits  into  frames,  so  that  each  frame  is  distinguishable 
from another. 
 Framing  in  the  data  link  layer  separates  a  message  from  one  source  to  a  destination,  or 
from other  messages  to  other  destinations,  by  adding  a  sender  address  and  a  destination 
address. 
 The  destination  address  defines  where  the  packet  is  to  go;  the  sender  address  helps  the 
recipient acknowledge the receipt. 
FRAMING: 
FIXED SIZE FRAMING: 
**Framing is of  2 types :1-fixed size framing  2-variable size framing. 
 In fixed size framing , there is no need to define boundaries of a frames. 
 The size itself can be used as a delimiter. 
 An example of this network is ATM wide area network,which uses  frames of fixed size 
called cells. 
VARIABLE SIZE FRAMING: 
 Variable-size framing is prevalent in LAN. 
 In  this  framing  ,  we  need  to  define  a  way  to  determine  the  beginning  and  end  of  the 
frame. 
 There are two approaches  were used for this purpose. 
 Character-oriented approach  
 Bit oriented approach 
CHARACTER-ORIENTED PROTOCOLS: 
 In  a  character-oriented  protocol,data  to  be  carried  are  8-bit  characters  from  a  coding 
system such as ASCII. 
 The  header,  which  normally  carries  the  source  and  destination  addresses  and  other 
control information. 
 The  trailer,  which  carries  error  detection  or  error  correction  redundant  bits,  are  also 
multiples of 8 bits. 
 To separate one frame from another an 8-bit flag is added at the beginning and end of the 
frame. 
 The format of frame is as follows: 

 
 So,If  the  data  itself  contains  flag  then  the  receiver  may  encounter  it  as  the  end  of  the 
frame.To  overcome  this  a  concept  called  byte  stuffing  is  added  to  character-oriented 
approach. 
BYTE STUFFING AND UNSTUFFING: 
 Byte stuffing is the process of adding 1 extra byte whenever there is a flag or escape(esc) 
character in the set i.e., data. 
 A character byte called esc is added before the flag or esc sequence.. 
 Consider the example, 
 
 In  this  example,  the  data  that  is  send  to  receiver is  flag  and  esc so  before  the  receiver 
receives any error a byte called esc is inserted during stuffing. 
 So , When unstuffed the 2 inserted esc characters are skipped , and the data after the esc 
sequence is considered as the data . Then the data received is the actual data that is send 
by the sender. 
BIT-ORIENTED APPROACH: 

 Generally each frame starts and end with a stream of bits called 01111110(called flag 
byte). 
 So , If there is a data which contains 01111110  then there is a chance for the receiver 
to receive an error. 
 Whenever  sender  datalink’s  layer  encounters  5  consecutive  1’s  in  the  data  then  it 
automatically stuff’s 0 into the outgoing bit stream. 
 When  the  receiver  sees  five  consecutive  incoming  1  bits,  followed  by  a  0  bit,  it 
automatically destuffs (i.e., deletes) the 0 bit. 
 If  the  user  data  contain  the  flag  pattern,  01111110,  this  flag  is  transmitted  as 
011111010 but stored in the receiver's memory as 01111110. 
 Consider the example, 
 
 So, in this example the data in the sender side contains 5 consecutive 1’s so a bit 0 
is stuffed in the frame. 
 When the frame is received by the receiver side after the 5 consecutive 1’s the 0 is 
unstuffed(deleted) and the bits after that 0 is considered as data. 
FLOW AND ERROR CONTROL: 
 Data  Communication  atleast requires  2  systems  to  communicate..one  to  send  data  and 
one to receive.. 
 So , This requires a great deal of coordination to transmit and receive correct data.. 
 The  most  important  responsibilities  of  the  data  link  layer  are  flow  control  and  error 
control 

FLOW CONTROL: 
 Flow control is a set of procedures that tells the sender how much data it can transmit 
before it must wait for an acknowledgment from the receiver. 
 Any receiving device has a limited speed at which it can process incoming data and a 
limited amount of memory in which to store incoming data. 
 The  receiving  device  must  be  able  to  inform  the  sending  device  before  those  limits 
are  reached  and  to  request  that  the  transmitting  device  send  fewer  frames  or  stop 
temporarily. 
 Incoming data must be checked and processed before they can be used. 
 The rate of such processing is often slower than the rate of transmission. 
 For  this  reason,  each  receiving  device  has  a  block  of  memory,  called  a  buffer, 
reserved for storing incoming data until they are processed. 
 If  the  buffer  begins  to  fill  up,  the  receiver  must  be  able  to  tell  the  sender  to  halt 
transmission until it is once again able to receive. 
    ERROR CONTROL: 
 Error control is both error detection and error correction. 
 In  error  detection  or  control  the receiver  sends  the  sender  the  details  of  lost  frames  and 
asks the sender to retransmit the frames. 
 In the data link layer, the term error control refers primarily to methods of error detection 
and retransmission. 
 Error  control  in  the  data  link  layer  is  often  implemented  simply:  Any  time  an  error  is 
detected  in  an  exchange,  specified  frames  are  retransmitted.  This  process  is  called 
automatic repeat request (ARQ). 
ERROR DETECTION ERROR CORRECTION: 
TYPES OF ERRORS: 
 Single-bit error: The term single-bit error means that only 1 bit of a given data unit is 
changed from 1 to 0 or from 0 to 1. 
 
 Burst  error: The  term  burst  error  means  that  2  or  more  bits  in  the  data  unit  have 
changed from 1 to 0 or from 0 to 1. 

 
REDUNDANCY: 
 The central concept in detecting or correcting errors is redundancy. 
 To detect or correct errors, we need to send some extra bits with our data. 
 These  redundant  bits  are  added  by  the  sender  and  removed  by  the  receiver.  Their 
presence allows the receiver to detect or correct corrupted(error) bits. 
ERROR DETECTION: 
 In Error detection we are looking forward just to see if error has occurred or not. 
 The simple is ‘yes’ or ‘no’. 
ERROR CORRECTION: 
 The  correction  of  error  is  more  difficult  than  detection.In  error  correction  we  need  to  know 
the  exact  number  of  bits  we  have  corrected  and  more  importantly  their  location  in  the 
message. 
 Two methods of error correction: 
 Forward error correction : Here , receiver tries to guess the , message by redundant bits 
. It is possible if number of errors are small. 
 Correction by retransmission : Receiver detects the occurence of an error and asks the 
sender to resend the frame . This process is repeated until the message received is ‘error 
free?’ 
CODING: 
 Redundancy is achieved through various coding schemes. 
 The sender adds redundant bits through a process that creates a relationship between the 
redundant bits and the actual data bits. 
 Following  figure  shows  the  general  idea ABOUT  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  Encoder  and 
Decoder. 

 
 Coding  schemes  can  be  divided  into  two  broad  categories: Block  Coding and 
Convolution Coding. 
BLOCK CODING: 
 This  type  of  coding  is  used  to detect  and  correct  errors  when  the  data  received  by  the 
receiver is wrong. 
 Assume the length of the data word be ‘k’ bits. 
 And  length  of  the  code  word is ‘n’ bits,to obtain code words so no.of redundant bits ‘r’ 
are added. 
                  n=k+r 
 So,the no.of datawords formed are 2
k 
 where k is the no.of bits in the dataword. 
 As usual there occurs 2
n
 code words where n is the no.of bts in code word. 
 The conditions that are remembered are n>k and 2
n
-2
k
 code words are not used. 
ERROR DETECTION: 
 Generally to obtain parity we opt for a procedure called “even parity” which contains 
even no.of 1’s in the codeword. 
 Table:Represents the error detection mechanism in Block coding 
 
 So ,Here in this example a dataword of 2 bits is considered so k=2. 
 And codeword of 3 bit is considered satisfying the conditions. 
 Redundant bits are calculated using event parity. 
 

        CODEWORD             USED OR UNUSED 
000 Used 
001 Unused 
010 Unused 
011 Used 
100 Unused 
101 Used 
110 Used 
111 unused 
 The process of error detection is as follows: 
 
 So, a data word on the sender site is send to generator so the redundant bits are added and 
the code word is sent to receiver. 
 Then the code word on the receiver site is sent to checker to check for a valid codeword 
i.e., used code word. 
 If the codeword is a valid code word then the data in the code word is extracted otherwise 
the code word is discarded. 
 In  error  detection  of  this  block  codes  there  are  some  cases  to  be  worked  with:--Assume 
the dataword to be sent is 01 so the corresponding codeword is 011. 
 Case1:If the receiver receives 011 codeword as it is a valid codeword the data is extracted 
and the 01and data is accepted. 
 Case2:If the code word received is 111 it is not a valid codeword so it is discarded. 
 Case 3:If the code word received is 000 which is valid codeword but the code word that 
is  sent  by  the  receiver  is 011.Though  the  data  from  the 000  is  accepted  and  data  is 
extracted. 
ERROR CORRECTION: 
 The process of error correction is as follows: 

 
 So, In the mechanism of correcting errors in this block codes. There occurs a process 
or  method  called  “guessing  method” The  corrupted  code  word  is  compared  with 
valid  code  words  and  the  code  word  with  least  no.of  differences  with  the  valid 
codewords is considered to be correct code word. 
 Consider the data table which contains data words and the valid code words: 
 
 Let us see this in detail with an example: 
 Let  us  assume  the  dataword  that  is  sent  is  01  so  the  corresponding  codeword  is 
01011. 
 But  the  received  codeword  is  01001  which  is  a  corrupted  one  and  needs  to  be 
corrected. 
 Case1:Compare 01001 with first valid code word 00000. 
                              0   1   0   0   1 
                              0   0   0   0   0 
So, there is a change in 2 bits of data 
Therefore 2. 
 Case 2:Compare the codeword 01001 with 01011 
                             0 1 0 1 1  
                             0 1 0 0 1 

So, there is a change in only one bit in the code words  
Therefore it is 1. 
 Case 3:Compare the codeword 01001 with 10101 
                                      0 1 0 0 1  
                                      1 0 1 0 1 
So, there is a change in three bits in the code words  
Therefore it is 3. 
 Case 4: Compare 01001 with 11110. 
                                  0 1 0 0 1 
                                  1 1 1 1 0 
So, there is a change in four bits in the code words  
Therefore it is 4 
 So  ,  from  these  cases  the  minimum  no  of  differences  between  2  code  words  is  the 
case  2.So  the  codeword  of  cas2  is  considered  and  considering  it  to  be  the  correct 
codeword it extracts data from the code word. 
HAMMING DISTANCE: 
 This hamming distance is used for error control in the data. 
 The hamming distance is nothing but the number  of differences between the 
corresponding bits of two datawords. 
 The hamming distance is easily calculated using XOR operation between the 
datawords. 
 The no.of 1’s determine the result. 
 It is represented in the form of d(x,y). 
 Assume  the  datawords  are  000  and  111  to  be  compared.  The  hamming 
distance  between  these  datawords  is  3  since  the  XOR  operation  between 
these datawords is 111. 
MINIMUM HAMMING DISTANCE: 
 The  minimum hamming distance is the smallest hamming distance between all possible 
pairs. 
 We use d
min
 to specify the minimum hamming distance. 
 Consider the table. 

 
 So now calculate the minimum hamming distance for the set of datawords. 
 d(000,011)=011 so the distance is 2. 
 d(000,101)=101 so the distance is 2. 
 D(000,110)=110 so the distance is 2. 
 D(011,101)=110 so distance is 2. 
 D(011,110)=101 so the distance is 2 
 D(101,110)=001 so the distance is 2 
 So the minimum hamming distance that is possible for the taken table is 2. 
LINEAR CODES: 
          SIMPLE PARITY CHECKER: 
 A linear block code is a block code where the exclusive-OR of 2 codewords is a 
valid codeword. 
 So, one type of this linear coding is simple parity checker. 
 In this code ‘k’ is length of dataword ‘n’ is length of codeword where n=k+1 and 
that redundant bit is considered by even parity. 
 The minimum hamming distance considered for this case is 2. 
 So it can correct an single-bit error and not any error. 
 The structure of encoder and decoder is as folloes: 
 

 Consider the table which contains 4 bitdatawords and 5 bit code words. 
 
 As dataword length is 4 it accepts 16 combinations and therefore 16 codewords 
of each 5 bit length. 
 And Generally the redundant bit is added using modulo-2 addition 
                                  R0=A0+A1+A2+A3 
 Now the sender sends a codeword and is corrupted during the transmission. 
 The receiver  receives  a codeword,  and to  check  whether is a  correct  code word 
to be received it performs the same operation as the sender site i.e.., It performs 
he modulo-2 addition for the 5 bits in the codeword that is received. 
 There  is  a  bit  called  Syndrome  on  the  receiver  site  which  is  used  to  determine 
the received codeword is valid or not. 
 So,If the syndrome bit is 0 the no.of 1’s in the codeword is even which says no 
error  condition  and if it is  1 the no.of 1’s in  the codeword is  odd says error 
conditions. 
                                         S=B0+B1+B2+B3+Q0 
 Assume  the  dataword  that  has  to  be  sent  by  the  sender  is  1011  so  the 
corresponding codeword is 10111.. 
 So there are some cases to be studied to detect errors. 
 Case1:Let the received codeword be 10111 
           The receiver calculates s value which is 0 determing no error. 
 Case2:Let the received codeword be 10011 
           The receiver calculates the syndrome value and is= 1 
            As  it  determines  an  error  the  codeword  is  discarded  and  no  dataword  is 
taken. 
 Case3: Let the received code word be 10110. 
             The receiver calculates the syndrome value and is=1 
              So, the codeword is discarded and data is taken. 
 Case4:Let the received code word be 00110 

               The receiver checks the syndrome bit which is 0. 
                Though its an error it is considered to be valid codeword and the data                                                        
.                 of 00110 is accepted. 
 Case5:Let the code word received be 01011 
The syndrome bit is calculated and the value is 1 
So the codeword is discarded and data is not considered. 
 The simple parity check codes cannot detect even no.of errors. 
 The simple parity check detects one single error and also odd no.of errors. 
TWO DIMENSIONAL PARITY CHECK CODE: 
 This two dimensional parity check is an error detection and error correction code. 
 This parity check code uses minimum hamming distance is 3 .So, it detects 3 errors and 
corrects single error. 
 Let ‘k’ be the length of dataword and ‘n’ be the length of the codeword and assume an 
integer ‘m’ whose values are greater or equal to 3. 
 So, the n becomes 2
m
-1. 
 

 The above diagram tells about the number of errors and number of bits that are affected 
by the error. 
 In the fig.a., The row and columns are generated using even parities. 
 In  fig(b),  The  bit in  the 2
nd
 row  and  3
rd
 column  is  error  and  so  it  effects  the  two  parity 
bits. 
 In the same way two errors in the same row/column affects 2 parity bits. 
 Three errors affect 4 parity bits. 
 Four errors in the pattern given in the fig(d) cannot be detected because they doesn’t 
change or affect the parity bits. 
 The table determines the 4 bits datawords and the corresponding codewords. 
 
 The diagram represents the structure of encoder and decoder of two parity checker. 
 
 

 When  a  dataword  is  sent  by  the  sender  the  corresponding  code word  is  generated  by 
adding the redundant bits. The formulas of redundant bits are as follows. 
 
 
 When the code word is received by the receiver it sends the code word to checker which 
checks  the  code  word  as  valid  or  not  by  calculating  syndrome  bits.The  formula  of 
syndrome bits are as follows: 
 
 
 If all the 3 bits of syndrome are 0 then there is no error in the codeword received by the 
received by the receiver.If any bit in the syndrome is 1 then it determines the condition of 
error. 
 The  table  represents  the  Logical  decision  made  by  the  correction  logic  analyserof  the 
decoder. 
SYNDROME 000 001 010 011 100 101 110 111 
ERROR 
NONE q0 q1 b2 q2 b0 b3 b1 
 
CYCLIC CODES: 
Cyclic  codes  are  special  linear  block  codes  with one  extra  property.  If  a  codeword  is cyclically 
shifted or rotated, the result is another codeword. For example 1011000 is a code word then after 
a left shift  0110001 is also a valid code word. 
      CYCLIC REDUNDANCY CHECK: 
 We create cyclic codes to correct errors. 
 This cyclic redundancy check’s (CRC’s) are used in networks such as LAN and WAN. 
 The following table represents the cyclic codes table which can represent both linear and 
cyclic properties of the code. 

 
 This figure determines the one possible design for encoder and decoder. 
 
 
 In the encoder the dataword has ‘k’ bits in length ., the codeword has ‘n’ bits. 
 The size of the dataword is augumented by adding n-k 0’s on the rightmost side of 
dataword. 
 The n-bit result is fed into generator. 
 The generator uses n-k+1 bits of divisor.The quotient of the division is discarded 
and the remainder is appended to the dataword to create the codeword. 
 The  receiver  or  decoder  after  receiving  a  code  word  sends  it to  checker  a  replica 
of generator to check a valid code word.  
 When a code word is received by the checker it performs division operation same 
like encoder and the remainder is considered to be as syndrome value. 
 If the remainder at the decoder is 000 (all 0’s) then there is no error in the received 
code  word , otherwise it is an error codeword. 
 

 The figure shows the division operation of encoder. 
 
 The process of modulo-2 division is same as division process we use for decimal 
numbers. 
 So  same  like  division  process  the  first  4-bits  of  dividend  is  XORed  with  the 
divisor and the 3-bit remainder pulls down the extra bits in the dividend. 
 If no extra bits are present to pull down from dividend then that 3 bit remainder is 
used as the rendundant code that is to be added to dataword to make a code word. 
 The following figure represents the division in decoder. 
 
 

 The figure represents 2 cases where there is no error and there is an error. 
 In  the  first  case  as  the  codeword  is  received  the  checker  performs  the  division 
operation with the same divisor and checks the remainder 
 If  the  remainder  is 0  then  that  means  the  syndrome  is  zero  represents  there  is  no 
error and the dataword is taken 
 In  the  second  case  as  the  remainder  has  the  non  zero  value  so  that  represents  an 
error and the data word is discarded. 
POLYNOMIALS: 
 A better way to understand cyclic codes is using polynomials. 
 A pattern of 0’s and 1’s can be represented as polynomials with coefficients 0 and 1. 
 The power of each term shows the position of the bit; coefficient shows the value. 
 The following figure shows a binomial pattern along with its polynomial representation. 
 
 
 Using this polynomial representation we can reduce the no.of terms that have coefficient 
value as ‘0’. 
ADDING AND SUBTRACTING POLYNOMIALS: 
 In general mathematics the polynomials are added by adding the coefficients of variables 
with  same  power  or  exponent,  but  here  the  coefficients  are  only  1  and  0  hence  it  is 
modulo-2 addition. 
 It has 2 consequences. 
 First, addition and subtraction are same. 
 Second,  adding or subtracting is done by combining terms and deleting pairs of identical 
terms. 
MULTIPLYING OR DIVING TERMS: 
 The multiplication in polynomials is quite similar to the multiplication of polynomials in 
mathematics. Just add the powers of the terms. 

 Division  of  polynomials  is  quite  similar  to  the  division  of polynomials  i.e.,,  divide  the 
first term of dividend with first term of divisor to obtain the first term of quotient. 
 We multiply the term in quotient with the divisor and subtract it from the dividend 
 We continue this process till we get a term having less exponent than that of divisor. 
SHIFTING: 
 A binary pattern is often shifted a no.of bits to the right or left. 
 Shifting  to  left  means  adding  extra  zeros  on  the  right  side..So  shift  left  is determined  as 
multiplying each term of polynomial with x
m
 where m is no.of bits to be shifted. 
 The following figure shows the example of a CRC division using polynomials. 
 
 
 
CYCLIC  CODE  ANALYSIS  (Write  the  procedure  for  CRC  division  in 
theoretical form.) 
ADVANTAGES: 
 These cyclic codes can detect single-bit error,double errors, an odd number of errors amd 
burst errors 
 Easily implemented in hardware and software. 
 Used in many networks. 
CHECKSUM: 
 This is an error detection method. 
 It is used in the internet by several protocols although not at the datalink layer. 

 Checksum is based on the concept of redundancy. 
IDEA: 
 The basic idea of check sum is along with the data that is to be sent the sum of those 
data is also sent. 
 Assume  if  the  set  of  numbers  we  sent  are  (7,11,12,0,6)  along  with  this  data  sum  of 
these values are also sent (7,11,12,0,6,36). 
 When  the  receiver  receiver  receives  data  the  receiver  adds  5  numbers  and  check  the 
sum with the original sum. 
 If both are same then it considers the data to be no error data and accepts the data by 
neglecting sum. 
 Else data is discarded considering the error 
ONE’S COMPLEMENT: 
 If all of our data can be written as as 4-bit word except for the checksum one solution 
is to use one’s complement, where we can represent numbers in 0 to 2
n
-1 using n bits. 
 If  the number has more than n bits then the left most bits are added to the rightmost 
bits of number which is wrapping. 
 In one’s complement arithmetic negative numbers can be represented by inverting all 
bits i.e.,, Subtracting the number from 2
n
-1. 
 An example to explain one’s complement arithmetic is as follows: 
 How to represent number 21 in one’s complement arithmetic using 4 bits? 
 The solution is ...The binary value of 21 is 10101 so the left most bit is wrapped by 
adding the bit to rightmost variable. (0101+1) =6. 
EXAMPLE: 
 The figure shows the process at sender and receiver. 
 Assume the data to be (7,11,12,0,6) to be sent 
 The sender initialises checksum to 0 and adds all data along with checksum. 
 The sum value is 36 which cannot be represented using 4 bits. So the left most 2 bits 
are wrapped with the rightmost 2 bits and its value becomes 6. 
 The wrapped sum is then complemented to obtain the check sum value which is (15-
6)=9. 
 The  receiver  follows  the  same  procedure  and  the  sum  is  45  (sum  of  data  and 
checksum)   and   the   wrapped sum   becomes   15.   And   the   wrapped   sum   is 
complemented to obtain the checksum whose value is 0. 
 Which determines there is no error in the data received by the receiver. 

 So, the data is accepted and the sum is discarded. 
 
INTERNET CHECKSUM: 
 Internet has been using a 16-bit checksum. 
 Sender site: 
i) The message is divided into 16-bit words. 
ii) The value of checksum word is set to zero. 
iii) All words using checksum are added using one,s complement aritnmetic. 
iv) The sum is complemented and becomes the checksum. 
v) The check sum is sent with data. 
 Receiver site: 
i) The message including checksum is divided into 16-bit words. 
ii) All words are added using one’s complement addition. 
iii) The sum is complemented and becomes the new checksum. 
iv) If the value of checksum is 0, the message is accepted; otherwise rejected. 
 The checksum is well-suited for software implementation 
 Short  programs  are  written  to  calculate  the  checksum  at  the  receiver  site  or  to  to  check 
the validity of the message at the receiver site. 
DATALINK LAYER PROTOCOLS: 
NOISELESS CHANNELS: 
Noiseless  channel  is  a  type  of  ideal  channel  where  there  is  no  chance  of  frame  lost,data 
corruption or duplication. 
The noiseless channel contains two protocols: 
 Simplest protocol 

 Stop and Wait ARQ 
Simplest Protocol: 
 In   this   protocol   we   are not   considering   about   error   control   because   the   channel 
considered is noiseless channel. 
 The design of simplest protocol is as follows 
 
 
Sender Site: 
 On sender site of this protocol the data from network layer is sent to datalink layer 
made frames and is sent to physical layer and then to receiver. 
 So, an event from network layer is  generated to ask datalink layer to send data in 
the form of packets. 
 If the event is accepted then the data is made to frames and is sent to receiver. 
 This process has an Repeat Forever algorithm to be executed. 
 The algorithm is as follows: 
 
 The loop is infinite loop because the condition of the loop is always true. 
 If the request of the network layer is accepted then the data is taken from network 
layer and is made to frame and the frame is sent to receiver. 
Receiver Site: 

 On receiver site of this protocol the data from physical layer is sent to datalink 
layer and then datalink layer to network layer. 
 An event of arriving of frame is occurred so that the frame from the sender site 
is accepted by the receiver. 
 If the event is accepted then the data is sent to upper layers. 
 So,  same  like  sender  receiver  also  has  an  repeat  forever  algorithm  to  be 
executed. 
 The algorithm is as follows: 
 
 So when an arrival notification is accepted then the frame is received and then 
datais extracted from the frame and delivers the data to network layer which is 
upper layer. 
So  In  this  protocol the  sender  doesn’t  think  about  the  receiver  .to  send  three 
frames 3 events occur at sender site and three events at receiver site. 
 

STOP AND WAIT PROTOCOL: 
 In this protocol we are not considering about error control because the channel 
considered is noiseless channel. 
 The stop and wait protocol came to light because in Simplest protocol the data 
frames are sent irrespective of the receiver’s bandwidth. 
 So, In this protocol the frames are sent one by one till an acknowledgement of 
the next frame is received. 
 The design of simplest protocol is as follows 
 
Sender Site: 
 On sender site of this protocol the data from network layer is sent to datalink layer made 
frames and is sent to physical layer and then to receiver. 
 So, an event from network layer is generated to ask datalink layer to send data in the form 
of packets. 
 If the event is accepted then the data is made to frames and is sent to receiver. 
 After the frame is received by the receiver then a acknowledgement frame is sent by the 
receiver to sender after the acknowledgement frame is received next frame is sent by the 
sender. 
 This process has an Repeat Forever algorithm to be executed. 
 The algorithm is as follows: 

 
Receiver Site: 
 On receiver site of this protocol the data from physical layer is sent to datalink layer and 
then datalink layer to network layer. 
 An  event  of  arriving  of  frame  is occurred  so  that  the  frame  from  the  sender  site  is 
accepted by the receiver. 
 After the frame is accepted by the receiver a new frame called acknowledgement frame is 
created so that the sender knows whether the frame is received by the receiver or not. 
 After  the  acknowledgement  is  sent  the  data  is  extracted  from  frame  and  sent  to  upper 
layers. 
 So, same like sender receiver also has an repeat forever algorithm to be executed. 
 The algorithm is as follows: 
 

 
 
 
 