

 
 
 
UNIT 2 
 
INTRODUCTION TO DATALINK LAYER 
 
INTRODUCTION: 
 
The  Internet  is  a  combination  of  networks  glued  together  by  connecting 
devices (routers or switches). If a packet is to travel from a host to another host, it 
needs to pass through these networks. 
 
Communication  at  the  data-link  layer  is  made  up  of  five  separate  logical 
connections between the data-link layers in the path. 
 
NODES AND LINKS: 
 
Communication at the data-link layer is node-to-node. A data unit from one 
point  in  the  Internet  needs  to  pass  through  many  networks  (LANs  and  WANs)  to 
reach another point.  
 
Theses LANs and WANs are connected by routers. It is customary to refer to 
the two end hosts and the routers as nodes and the networks in between as links. 
Figure 2.1 is a simple representation of links and nodes when the path of the data 
unit is only six nodes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.1: NODES AND LINKS 
 
The first node  is the  source  host;  the last node is the destination host. The 
other four nodes are four routers. The first, the third, and the fifth links represent 
the three LANs; the second and the fourth links represent the two WANs. 
 
Services: 
 
The  data-link  layer  is  located  between  the  physical  and  the network  layers. 
The data link layer provides services to the network layer; it receives services from 
the physical layer. 
 
51 
 

The  duty  scope  of  the  data-link  layer  is  node-to-node.  When  a  packet  is 
travelling  in  the  Internet,  the  data-link  layer  of  a node  (host  or  router)  is 
responsible for delivering a datagram to the next node in the path. 
 
For   this   purpose,   the   data-link   layer   of   the   sending   node   needs   to 
encapsulate the datagram received from the network in a frame, and the data-link 
layer of the receiving node needs to decapsulate the datagram from the frame. 
 
In  other  words,  the  data-link  layer  of  the  source  host  needs  only  to 
encapsulate,  the  data-link  layer  of  the  destination  host  needs  to  decapsulate,  but 
each intermediate node needs to both encapsulate and decapsulate. We can list the 
services provided by a data-link layer as shown below. 
 
FRAMING: Definitely,  the  first  service  provided  by  the  data-link  layer  is 
framing.  The  data-link  layer  at  each  node  needs  to  encapsulate  the  datagram 
(packet received from the network layer) in a frame before sending it to the next 
node. The node also needs to decapsulate the datagram from the frame received on 
the logical channel.  
 
FLOW  CONTROL: The  sending  data-link  layer  at  the  end  of  a  link  is  a 
producer of  frames;  the  receiving  data-link  layer  at  the  other  end  of  a  link  is  a 
consumer.  
 
If the rate of produced frames is higher than the rate of consumed frames, 
frames  at  the  receiving  end  need  to  be  buffered  while  waiting  to  be  consumed 
(processed).  Definitely,  we  cannot  have  an  unlimited  buffer  size  at  the  receiving 
side.  We  have  two  choices.  The  first  choice  is  to  let  the  receiving  data-link  layer 
drop the frames if its buffer is full. 
 
The  second  choice  is  to  let  the  receiving  data-link  layer  send  a  feedback  to 
the sending data-link layer to ask it to stop or slow down. Different data-link-layer 
protocols use different strategies for flow control. 
 
ERROR CONTROL: At the sending node, a frame in a data-link layer needs 
to  be  changed  to  bits,  transformed  to  electromagnetic  signals,  and  transmitted 
through the transmission media. At the receiving node, electromagnetic signals are 
received, transformed to bits, and put together to create a frame. 
 
Since electromagnetic signals are susceptible to error, a frame is susceptible 
to error. The error needs first to be detected. After detection, it needs to be either 
corrected at the receiver node or discarded and retransmitted by the sending node. 
 
CONGESTION  CONTROL: Although  a  link  may  be  congested  with  frames, 
which may result in frame loss, most data-link-layer protocols do not directly use a 
congestion control to alleviate congestion, although some wide-area networks do. 
 
 
 
52 
 

In  general,  congestion  control  is  considered  an  issue  in  the  network  layer  or  the 
transport layer because of its end-to-end nature. 
 
Two categories of links: We can have a data-link layer that uses the whole 
capacity of the medium; we can also have a data-link layer that uses only part of 
the capacity of the link. 
 
In  other  words,  we can  have  a point-to-point  link or  a broadcast  link.  In  a 
point-to-point link, the link is dedicated to the two devices; in a broadcast link, the 
link is shared between several pairs of devices. 
 
Two Sub layers: 
 
To  better  understand  the  functionality  of  and  the  services  provided  by  the 
link layer, we can divide the data-link layer into two sub layers: data link control 
(DLC) and media access control (MAC). 
 
The data link control sub layer deals with all issues common to both point-to-
point and broadcast links; the media access control sub layer deals only with issues 
specific to broadcast links.  
 
LINK-LAYER ADDRESSING: 
 
A link-layer address is sometimes called a link address, sometimes a physical 
address, and sometimes a MAC address. 
 
Since a link is controlled at the data-link layer, the addresses need to belong to the 
data-link  layer.  When  a  datagram  passes  from  the  network  layer  to  the  data-link 
layer, the datagram will be encapsulated in a frame and two data-link  
 
addresses are added to the frame header. These two addresses are changed 
every time the frame moves from one link to another. 
 
Three types of addresses: 
 
Some link-layer protocols define three types of addresses: unicast, multicast, 
and broadcast. 
Unicast  Address: Each  host  or  each  interface  of  a  router  is  assigned  a 
unicast address. Unicasting means one-to-one communication. 
 
Multicast  Address: Some  link-layer  protocols  define  multicast  addresses. 
Multicasting means one-to-many communication. 
Broadcast  Address: Some  link-layer  protocols  define  a  broadcast  address. 
Broadcasting   means   one-to-all   communication.   A   frame   with   a   destination 
broadcast address is sent to all entities in the link. 
 
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP): 
 
 
53 
 

Anytime a node has an IP datagram to send to another node in a link, it has 
the IP address of the receiving node. The source host knows the IP address of the 
default router. 
 
Each  router except  the  last  one  in  the  path  gets  the  IP  address  of  the  next 
router  by  using  its  forwarding  table.  The  last  router  knows  the IP  address  of  the 
destination host. 
 
However,  the  IP  address  of  the  next  node  is  not  helpful  in  moving  a  frame 
through  a  link;  we  need  the  link-layer  address  of  the  next  node.  This  is  the  time 
when the Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) becomes helpful. 
 
The  ARP  protocol  is  one  of  the  auxiliary  protocols  defined  in  the  network 
layer. It belongs to the network layer, but we discuss it here because it maps an IP 
address to a logical-link address. ARP accepts an IP address from the IP protocol, 
maps  the  address to  the  corresponding  link-layer  address,  and  passes  it  to  the 
data-link layer. 
 
Anytime  a  host  or  a  router  needs  to  find  the  link-layer  address  of  another 
host or router in its network, it sends an ARP request packet. The packet includes 
the  link-layer  and  IP  addresses  of  the  sender and the  IP  address  of  the  receiver. 
Because the sender does not know the link-layer address of the receiver, the query 
is broadcast over the link using the link-layer broadcast address. 
 
Every host or router on the network receives and processes the ARP request 
packet, but only the intended recipient recognizes its IP address and sends back an 
ARP response packet. The response packet contains the recipient‘s IP and link-layer 
addresses. The packet is unicast directly to the node that sent the request packet. 
 
Packet Format: 
 
Figure  2.2  shows  the  format  of  an  ARP  packet.  The  names  of  the  fields  are 
self-explanatory. The hardware type field defines the type of the link-layer protocol; 
Ethernet is given the type 1. 
 
The protocol  type field  defines  the  network-layer  protocol:  IPv4  protocol  is 
(0800)16. The source hardware and source protocol addresses are variable-length 
fields defining the link-layer and network-layer addresses of the sender. 
 
The  destination  hardware  address  and  destination  protocol  address  fields 
define  the  receiver  link-layer  and  network-layer  addresses.  An  ARP  packet  is 
encapsulated  directly  into  a  data-link  frame.  The  frame  needs  to  have  a  field  to 
show that the payload belongs to the ARP and not to the network-layer datagram. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.2: ARP PACKET 
 
ERROR DETECTION AND CORRECTION: 
 
Networks  must  be  able  to  transfer  data  from  one  device  to  another  with 
acceptable accuracy. For most applications, a system must guarantee that the data 
received are identical to the data transmitted. 
 
Any time data are transmitted from one node to the next, they can become 
corrupted in passage. Many factors can alter one ormore bits of a message. Some 
applications require a mechanism for detecting and correcting errors. 
 
Some  applications  can  tolerate  a  small  level  of  error.  For  example,  random 
errors in audio or video transmissions maybe tolerable, but when we transfer text, 
we expect a very high level of accuracy. 
 
At  the  data-link  layer,  if  a  frame  is  corrupted  between  the  two  nodes,  it 
needs to be corrected before it continues its journey to other nodes. However, most 
link-layer  protocols  simply  discard  the  frame  and  let  the  upper-layer  protocols 
handle  the  retransmission  of  the  frame.  Some  multimedia  applications,  however, 
try to correct the corrupted frame. 
 
Types of Errors: 
 
Whenever   bits   flow   from   one   point   to   another,   they   are   subject   to 
unpredictable  changes  because  of interference. This  interference  can  change  the 
shape  of  the  signal.  The  term single-bit  error means  that  only  1  bit  of  a  given 
data unit (such as a byte, character, or packet) is changed from 1 to 0 or from 0 to 
1. 
 
The  term burst  error means  that  2  or  more  bits  in  the  data  unit  have 
changed from 1 to 0 or from 0 to 1. Figure 2.3 shows the effect of a single-bit and a 
burst error on a data unit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.3: SINGLE-BIT AND BURST ERROR 
 
A  burst  error  is  more  likely  to  occur  than  a  single-bit  error  because  the 
duration  of  the  noise  signal  is  normally  longer  than  the  duration  of  1  bit,  which 
means that when noise affects data, it affects a set of bits. 
 
The number of bits affected depends on the data rate and duration of noise. 
For example, if we are sending data at 1 kbps, a noise of 1/100 second can affect 
10 bits; if we are sending data at 1 Mbps, the same noise can affect 10,000 bits. 
 
Redundancy: 
 
The  central  concept  in  detecting  or  correcting errors is redundancy. To  be 
able  to  detect  or  correct  errors,  we  need  to  send  some  extra  bits  with  our  data. 
These redundant bits are added by the sender and removed by the receiver. Their 
presence allows the receiver to detect or correct corrupted bits. 
 
Detection versus Correction:  
 
The  correction  of  errors is more  difficult  than  the  detection.  In error 
detection, we are only looking to see if any error has occurred. The answer is a  
simple  yes  or  no.  We  are  not even  interested  in  the  number  of  corrupted  bits.  A 
single-bit error is the same for  us as a burst error. 
 
In error  correction, we  need  to  know  the  exact  number  of  bits  that  are 
corrupted  and,  more  importantly,  their  location  in  the  message.  The  number  of 
errors and the size of the message are important factors. 
 
Hamming Distance: 
 
One  of  the  central  concepts  in  coding  for  error  control  is  the  idea  of  the 
Hamming distance. The Hamming distance between two words (of the same size) 
is  the  number  of  differences  between  the  corresponding  bits.  We  show  the 
Hamming  distance  between  two  words x and y as d(x, y).  We  may  wonder  why 
Hamming distance is important for error detection. 
 
The  reason  is  that  the  Hamming  distance  between  the  received  codeword  and 
the  sent  codeword  is  the  number  of  bits  that  are  corrupted  during  transmission.  For 
example, if the codeword 00000 is sent and 01101 is received, 3 bits are in error and 
the Hamming distance between the two is d(00000, 01101) = 3. 
 
56 
 

In other words, if the Hamming distance between the send and the received 
codeword is not zero, the codeword has been corrupted during transmission. 
 
The Hamming distance can easily be found if we apply the XOR operation (⊕) on the two words and count 
the number of 1s in the result. Note that the Hamming distance is a value greater than or equal to zero 
 
CYCLIC CODES: 
 
Cyclic  codes  are  special  linear  block  codes  with  one  extra  property.  In  a 
cyclic code, if  a  codeword  is  cyclically  shifted  (rotated),  the  result  is  another 
codeword. For example, if 1011000 is a codeword and we cyclically left-shift, then 
0110001 is also a codeword. 
 
In this case, if we call the bits in the first word a0 to a6, and the bits in the 
second word b0 to b6, we can shift the bits by using the following: 
 
 
  
In  the  rightmost  equation,  the  last  bit  of  the  first  word  is  wrapped  around 
and becomes the first bit of the second word.  
 
Cyclic Redundancy Check: 
 
We  can  create  cyclic  codes  to  correct  errors.  In  this  section,  we  simply 
discuss a subset of cyclic codes called the cyclic redundancy check (CRC), which 
is used in networks such as LANs and WANs. 
 
Advantages of cyclic codes: 
 
We have seen that  cyclic codes have a very good performance in detecting 
single-bit errors, double errors, an odd number of errors, and burst errors. 
 
They  can  easily  be  implemented  in  hardware  and  software.  They  are 
especially fast when implemented in hardware. This has made cyclic codes a good 
candidate for many networks. 
 
CHECKSUM: 
 
Checksum is an error-detecting technique that can be applied to a message 
of  any  length.  In  the  Internet,  the  checksum  technique  is  mostly  used  at  the 
network and transport layer rather than the data-link layer. 
 
At  the  source,  the  message  is  first  divided  into m-bit  units.  The  generator 
then  creates  an  extra m-bit  unit  called  the checksum, which  is  sent  with  the 
message. 
 
 
 
 
57 
 

At   the   destination,   the   checker   creates   a   new   checksum   from   the 
combination of the message and sent checksum. If the new checksum is all 0s, the 
message is accepted; otherwise, the message is discarded. 
 
The idea of the traditional checksum is simple. We show this using a simple 
example. 
 
Example: 
 
Suppose the message is a list of five 4-bit numbers that we want to send to a 
destination.  In  addition  to  sending  these  numbers,  we  send  the  sum  of  the 
numbers. For example, if the set of numbers is (7, 11, 12, 0, 6), we send (7, 11, 
12, 0, 6, 36), where 36 is the sum of the original numbers. 
 
The receiver adds the five numbers and compares the result with the sum. If 
the  two  are  the  same,  the  receiver  assumes  no  error,  accepts  the  five  numbers, 
and discards the sum. Otherwise, there is an error somewhere and the message is 
not accepted.  
 
FORWARD ERROR CORRECTION: 
 
Retransmission  of  corrupted  and  lost packets is  not  useful  for  real-time 
multimedia  transmission  because  it  creates  an  unacceptable  delay  in  reproducing: 
we need to wait until the lost or corrupted packet is resent. 
 
We  need  to  correct  the error or reproduce  the  packet  immediately.  Several 
schemes have been designed and used in this case that is collectively referred to as 
forward error correction (FEC) techniques. 
 
USING HAMMING DISTANCE: 
 
We earlier discussed the Hamming distance for error detection. We said that 
to  detect s errors,  the  minimum  Hamming  distance  should  be dmin  = s +  1.  For 
error detection, we definitely need more distance. 
 
It can be shown that to detect t errors, we need to have dmin = 2t + 1. In 
other  words,  if  we  want  to correct  10  bits  in  a  packet,  we  need  to  make  the 
minimum hamming distance 21 bits, which means a lot of redundant bits, need to 
be sent with the data. 
 
CHUNK INTERLEAVING: 
 
Another way to achieve FEC in multimedia is to allow some small chunks to 
be missing at the receiver. We cannot afford to let all the chunks belonging to the 
same  packet  be  missing;  however,  we  can  afford  to  let  one  chunk  be  missing  in 
each packet. 
 
 
 
58 
 

Figure 2.4 shows that we can divide each packet into 5 chunks (normally the 
number  is  much  larger).  We  can  then  create  data  chunk  by  chunk  (horizontally), 
but  combine  the  chunks  into  packets  vertically.  In  this  case,  each  packet  sent 
carries a chunk from several original packets. If the packet is lost, we miss only one 
chunk in each packet, which is normally acceptable in multimedia communication. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.4: INTERLEAVING 
 
DATA LINK CONTROL 
 
DLC SERVICES: 
 
The data  link  control  (DLC) deals  with  procedures  for  communication 
between  two  adjacent  nodes—node-to-node communication—no  matter  whether 
the  link  is  dedicated  or  broadcast.  Data  link  control  functions  include framing and 
flow and error control. 
 
FRAMING: 
 
Data  transmission  in  the  physical  layer  means  moving  bits  in  the  form  of  a 
signal   from   the   source   to   the destination.   The   physical   layer   provides   bit 
synchronization to ensure that the sender and receiver use the same bit durations 
and timing. 
 
The  data-link  layer,  on  the  other  hand,  needs  to  pack  bits  into  frames,  so 
that  each  frame  is  distinguishable  from  another. Framing in  the  data-link  layer 
separates a message from one source to a destination by adding a sender address 
and a destination address. The destination address defines where the packet is to 
go; the sender address helps the recipient acknowledge the receipt. 
 
Although  the  whole  message  could  be  packed  in  one  frame,  which  is  not 
normally done; one reason is that a frame can be very large, making flow and error 
control very inefficient. When a message is carried in one very large frame, even a 
single-bit error would require the retransmission of the whole frame. When a 
 
 
59 
 

message  is  divided  into  smaller  frames,  a  single-bit  error  affects  only  that  small 
frame. 
 
Frame Size: 
 
Frames  can  be  of  fixed  or  variable  size.  In fixed-size  framing, there is  no 
need  for  defining  the  boundaries  of  the  frames;  the  size  itself  can  be  used  as  a 
delimiter. 
 
In variable-size framing, we need a way to define the end of one frame and 
the beginning of the next. Historically, two approaches were used for this purpose: 
a character-oriented approach and a bit-oriented approach. 
 
Character-Oriented Framing: 
 
In character-oriented (or byte-oriented) framing, data to be carried are 8-bit 
characters from a coding system such as ASCII. 
 
The header, which normally carries the source and destination addresses and 
other  control  information,  and  the  trailer,  which  carries  error  detection  redundant 
bits,  are  also  multiples  of  8  bits.  Figure  2.5  shows  the  format  of  a  frame  in  a 
character-oriented protocol.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.5: A FRAME IN A CHARACTER-ORIENTED PROTOCOL 
 
Character-oriented framing  was  popular  when  only  text  was  exchanged  by 
the data-link layers. 
 
However,  we  send  other  types  of  information  such  as  graphs,  audio,  and 
video; any character used for the flag could also be part of the information. If this 
happens,  the  receiver,  when  it  encounters  this  pattern  in  the  middle  of  the  data, 
thinks it has reached the end of the frame. 
 
To fix this problem, a byte-stuffing strategy was added to character-oriented 
framing.  In byte stuffing (or  character  stuffing),  a  special  byte  is  added  to  the 
data  section  of  the  frame  when  there  is  a  character  with  the  same  pattern  as  the 
flag. The data section is stuffed with an extra byte. 
 
This  byte  is usually called  the escape  character  (ESC) and  has  a  predefined  bit 
pattern.  Whenever  the  receiver  encounters  the  ESC  character,  it  removes  it  from  the 
data section and treats the next character as data, not as a delimiting flag. 
 
Bit-Oriented Framing: 
 
 
60 
 

In bit-oriented framing, the data section of a frame is a sequence of bits to 
be  interpreted  by  the  upper  layer  as  text,  graphic,  audio,  video,  and  so  on. 
However, in addition to headers (and possible trailers), we still need a delimiter to 
separate one frame from the other. 
 
Most protocols use a special 8-bit pattern flag, 01111110, as the delimiter to 
define the beginning and the end of the frame, as shown in Figure 2.6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.6: A FRAME IN A BIT-ORIENTED PROTOCOL 
 
This  flag  can  create  the  same  type  of  problem  we  saw  in  the  character-
oriented  protocols.  That  is,  if  the  flag  pattern  appears  in  the  data,  we  need  to 
somehow inform the  receiver that this  is not the end of the frame. We do this  by 
stuffing  1  single  bit  (instead  of  1  byte)  to  prevent  the  pattern  from  looking  like  a 
flag. The strategy is called bit stuffing.  
 
In bit stuffing, if a 0 and five consecutive 1 bits are encountered, an extra 0 
is added. This extra stuffed bit is eventually removed from the data by the receiver. 
 
Note that the extra bit is added after one 0 followed by five 1s regardless of 
the  value  of  the  next  bit.  This  guarantees  that  the  flag  field  sequence  does  not 
inadvertently appear in the frame.  
 
FLOW AND ERROR CONTROL: 
 
Whenever  an  entity produces items  and  another  entity  consumes  them,  there 
should be  a  balance  between  production  and  consumption  rates.  If  the  items  are 
produced  faster  than  they  can  be  consumed,  the  consumer  can  be  overwhelmed 
and may need to discard some items. 
 
If  the  items  are  produced  more  slowly  than  they  can  be  consumed,  the 
consumer must wait, and the system becomes less efficient. Flow control is related 
to the first issue. We need to prevent losing the data items at the consumer site. 
 
In  communication  at  the  data-link  layer,  we  are  dealing  with  four  entities: 
network and data-link layers at the sending node and network and data-link layers 
at the receiving node. 
 
Buffers: 
 
Although  flow  control  can  be  implemented  in  several  ways,  one  of  the 
solutions is normally to use two buffers; one at the sending data-link layer and the 
other at the receiving data-link layer. 
 
 
61 
 

A buffer is a set of memory locations that can hold packets at the sender and 
receiver.  The  flow  control  communication  can  occur  by  sending  signals  from  the 
consumer to the producer. When the buffer of the receiving data-link layer is full, it 
informs the sending data-link layer to stop pushing frames. 
 
Error Control: 
 
Since the underlying technology at the physical layer is not fully reliable, we 
need to implement error control at the data-link layer to prevent the receiving node 
from delivering corrupted packets to its network layer. 
 
Error control at the data-link layer is normally very simple and implemented 
using  one  of  the  following  two  methods.  In  both  methods,  a  CRC  is  added  to  the 
frame header by the sender and checked by the receiver. 
 

 In the first method, if the frame is corrupted, it is silently discarded; if it 
is not corrupted, the packet is delivered to the network layer. This method 
is used mostly in wired LANs such as Ethernet.



 In the second method, if the frame is corrupted, it is silently discarded; if 
it  is  not  corrupted,  an  acknowledgment  is  sent  (for  the  purpose  of  both 
flow and error control) to the sender.

 
 
 
A DLC protocol can be either connectionless or connection-oriented. 
 
Connectionless Protocol: 
 
In  a  connectionless protocol, frames  are  sent  from  one  node  to  the  next 
without any relationship between the frames; each frame is independent. Note that 
the  term connectionless here  does  not  mean  that  there  is  no  physical  connection 
(transmission  medium)  between  the  nodes;  it  means  that  there  is  no connection 
between frames. The frames are not numbered and there is no sense of ordering. 
Most of the data-link protocols for LANs are connectionless protocols. 
 
Connection-Oriented Protocol: 
 
In  a  connection-oriented  protocol,  a  logical  connection  should  first  be 
established  between  the  two  nodes  (setup  phase).  After  all  frames  that  are 
somehow  related  to  each  other  are  transmitted  (transfer  phase),  the  logical 
connection  is  terminated  (teardown  phase).  In  this  type  of  communication,  the 
frames are numbered and sent in order. 
 
If they are not received in order, the receiver needs to wait until all frames 
belonging to the same set are received and then deliver them in order to the 
 
 
 
62 
 

network layer. Connection oriented protocols are rare in wired LANs, but we can see 
them in some point-to-point protocols, some wireless LANs, and some WANs. 
 
DATA-LINK LAYER PROTOCOLS: 
 
Traditionally four protocols have been defined for the data-link layer to deal 
with  flow  and  error  control:  Simple,  Stop-and-Wait,  Go-Back-N,  and  Selective-
Repeat. Although the first two protocols still are used at the data-link layer, the last 
two have disappeared. 
 
Simple  Protocol: Our first  protocol  is  a simple  protocol with neither flow 
nor error control. We assume that the receiver can immediately handle any frame it 
receives.  In  other  words,  the  receiver  can  never  be  overwhelmed  with  incoming 
frames. 
 
The data-link layer at the sender gets a packet from its network layer, makes 
a frame out of it, and sends the frame. The data-link layer at the receiver receives 
a frame from the link, extracts the packet from the frame, and delivers the packet 
to its network layer.  
 
The data-link layers of the sender and receiver provide transmission services 
for their network layers.  
 
Stop-and-Wait Protocol: Our second protocol is called the Stop-and-Wait 
protocol, which uses both flow and error control. In this protocol, the sender sends 
one  frame  at  a  time  and  waits  for an  acknowledgement before  sending  the  next 
one. To detect corrupted frames, we need to add a CRC to each data frame. 
 
When a frame arrives at the receiver site, it is checked. If its CRC is incorrect, the 
frame is corrupted  and silently  discarded. The  silence of the receiver is a signal 
for the sender that a frame was either corrupted or lost. 
 
Every  time  the  sender  sends  a  frame,  it  starts  a  timer.  If  an  acknowledgment 
arrives before the timer expires, the timer is stopped and the sender sends the next 
frame (if it has one to send). If the timer expires, the sender resends the previous 
frame, assuming that the frame was either lost or corrupted. 
 
This  means  that  the  sender  needs  to  keep  a  copy  of  the  frame  until  its 
acknowledgment  arrives.  When  the  corresponding  acknowledgment  arrives,  the 
sender discards the copy and sends the next frame if it is ready. 
 
Piggybacking: 
 
The two protocols we discussed in this section are designed for unidirectional 
communication,  in  which  data  is  flowing  only  in  one  direction  although  the 
acknowledgment may travel in the other direction. 
 
 
 
63 
 

Protocols  have  been  designed  in  the  past  to  allow  data  to  flow  in  both 
directions.  However,  to  make  the  communication  more  efficient,  the  data  in  one 
direction is piggybacked with the acknowledgment in the other direction. 
 
In  other  words,  when  node  A  is  sending  data  to  node  B,  Node  A  also 
acknowledges  the  data  received  from  node  B.  Because  piggybacking  makes 
communication  at  the  data  link  layer  more  complicated,  it  is  not  a  common 
practice. 
 
HDLC: 
 
High-level  Data  Link  Control  (HDLC) is  a  bit-oriented  protocol  for 
communication  over  point-to-point  and  multipoint  links.  It  implements  the  Stop-
and-Wait protocol. 
 
Configurations and Transfer Modes: 
 
HDLC  provides  two  common  transfer  modes  that  can  be used  in  different 
configurations: normal  response  mode  (NRM) and asynchronous  balanced  mode 
(ABM). In normal response mode (NRM), the station configuration is unbalanced. 
 
We  have  one  primary  station  and  multiple  secondary  stations.  A primary 
station can send  commands;  a secondary station can  only  respond.  The  NRM  is 
used for both point-to-point and multipointlinks, as shown in Figure 2.7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.7: NORMAL RESPONSE MODE 
 
In  ABM,  the  configuration  is  balanced.  The  link  is  point-to-point, and  each 
station  can  function  as  a  primary  and  a  secondary  (acting  as  peers),  as  shown  in 
Figure 2.8. This is the common mode today. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.8: ASYNCHRONOUS BALANCED MODE 
 
 
 
64 
 

To provide the flexibility necessary to support all the options possible in the 
modes  and  configurations  just  described,  HDLC  defines  three  types  of  frames: 
information  frames  (I-frames), supervisory  frames  (S-frames),  and unnumbered 
frames (U-frames). 
 
Each type of frame serves as an envelope for the transmission of a different 
type of message. I-frames are used to data-link user data and control information 
relating to user data (piggybacking). 
 
S-frames  are  used  only  to  transport  control  information.  U-frames  are 
reserved for system management. Information carried by U-frames is intended for 
managing the link itself. 
 
Each frame in HDLC may contain up to six fields, as shown in Figure 2.9: a 
beginning  flag  field,  an  address  field,  a  control  field,  an  information  field,  a  frame 
check   sequence   (FCS)   field,   and   an   ending   flag   field.   In   multiple-frame 
transmissions, the ending flag of one frame can serve as the beginning flag of the 
next frame.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.9: HDLC FRAMES 
 

 Flag  field. This  field  contains  synchronization  pattern  01111110,  which 
identifies both the beginning and the end of a frame.



 Address field. This field contains the address of the secondary station. If 
a primary station created the frame, it contains to address. If a secondary 
station creates the frame, it contains from address. The address field can 
be  one  byte  or  several  bytes  long,  depending  on  the  needs  of  the 
network.



 Control field. The control field is one or two bytes used for flow and error 
control.



 Information  field. The  information  field  contains  the  user‘s  data  from 
the  network  layer or  management  information.  Its  length  can  vary  from 
one network to another.



 FCS  field. The  frame  check  sequence  (FCS)  is  the  HDLC  error  detection 
field. It can contain either a 2- or 4-byte CRC.

 
POINT-TO-POINT PROTOCOL (PPP): 
 
65 
 

One of the most common protocols for point-to-point access is the Point-to-
Point Protocol (PPP). Today, millions of Internet users who need to connect their 
home computers to the server of an Internet service provider use PPP. 
 
The majority of these users have a traditional modem; they are connected to 
the  Internet  through  a  telephone  line,  which  provides  the  services  of  the  physical 
layer. But to control and manage the transfer of data, there is a need for a point-
to-point protocol at the data-link layer. PPP is by far the most common. 
 
Services provided by PPP: 
 
PPP  defines  the  format  of  the  frame  to  be  exchanged  between  devices.  It 
also  defines  how  two  devices  can  negotiate  the  establishment  of  the  link  and  the 
exchange of data. PPP is designed to accept payloads from several network layers 
(not only IP). 
 
Authentication  is  also  provided  in  the  protocol,  but  it  is  optional.  The  new 
version  of  PPP,  called Multilink  PPP, provides  connections  over  multiple  links.  One 
interesting feature of PPP is that it provides network address configuration. This is 
particularly  useful  when  a  home  user  needs  a temporary network  address  to 
connect to the Internet.  
 
Services Not Provided by PPP: 
 
PPP  does  not  provide  flow  control.  A  sender  can  send  several  frames  one 
after  another  with  no  concern  about  overwhelming  the  receiver.  PPP  has  a  very 
simple mechanism for error control. A CRC field is used to detect errors. 
 
If  the  frame  is  corrupted,  it  is  silently  discarded;  the  upper-layer  protocol 
needs to take care of the problem. Lack of error control and sequence  numbering 
may  cause  a  packet  to  be  received  out  of  order.  PPP  does  not  provide  a 
sophisticated addressing mechanism to handle frames in a multipoint configuration. 
 
Framing: 
 
PPP  uses  a  character-oriented  (or  byte-oriented)  frame.  Figure  2.10  shows 
the format of a PPP frame. The description of each field follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.10: PPP FRAME FORMAT 
 

 Flag. A PPP frame starts and ends with a 1-byte flag with the bit pattern 
01111110.

 
 
66 
 


 Address. The address field in this protocol is a constant value and set to 
11111111 (broadcast address).



 Control. This  field  is  set  to  the  constant  value  00000011  (imitating 
unnumbered frames in HDLC).



 Protocol. The protocol field defines what is being carried in the data field: 
either user data or other information. This field is by default 2 bytes long, 
but the two parties can agree to use only 1 byte.



 Payload field. The data field is a sequence of bytes with the default of a 
maximum of 1500 bytes; but this can be changed during negotiation.

 
o The data field is byte-stuffed if the flag byte pattern appears in this 
field. 
 
o Because there is no field defining the size of the data field, padding 
is needed if the size is less than the maximum default value or the 
 
maximum negotiated value. 
 

 FCS. The frame check sequence (FCS) is simply a 2-byte or 4-byte 
standard CRC.  
 
MEDIA ACCESS CONTROL (MAC)  
 
When  nodes  or  stations  are  connected  and  use  a  common  link,  called  a 
multipoint or broadcast  link, we  need  a  multiple-access  protocol  to  coordinate 
access to the link. The problem of controlling the access to the medium is similar to 
the rules of speaking in an assembly. 
 
Many  protocols  have  been  devised  to  handle  access  to  a  shared  link.  All  of 
these  protocols  belong  to  a  sub  layer  in  the  data-link  layer  called media  access 
control (MAC). We categorize them into three groups, as shown in Figure 2.11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.11: TAXONOMY OF MULTIPLE-ACCESS PROTOCOLS 
 
RANDOM ACCESS: 
 
 
 
 
67 
 

In random-access or contention methods,  no  station  is superior  to 
another  station  and  none  is  assigned  control  over  another.  At  each  instance,  a 
station that has data to send uses a procedure defined by the protocol to make a 
decision on whether or not to send. 
 
This  decision  depends  on  the  state  of  the  medium  (idle  or  busy).  Two 
features give this method its name. 
 

 First,  there  is  no  scheduled  time  for  a  station  to  transmit.  Transmission  is 
random  among  the  stations.  That  is  why  these  methods  are  called random 
access.



 Second, no rules specify which station should send next. Stations compete with 
one  another  to  access  the  medium.  That  is  why  these  methods  are  also  called 
contention methods.

 
In  a  random-access  method,  each  station  has  the  right  to  the  medium 
without  being  controlled  by  any  other  station.  However,  if  more  than  one  station 
tries  to  send,  there  is  an  access  conflict—collision—and  the  frames  will  be  either 
destroyed  or  modified.  To  avoid  access  conflict or to  resolve  it  when  it  happens, 
each station follows a procedure that answers the following questions: 
 
 

 When can the station access the medium?



 What can the station do if the medium is busy?



 How can the station determine the success or failure of the transmission?



 What can the station do if there is an access conflict?

 
The  random-access  methods  have  evolved  from  a  very  interesting  protocol 
known  as ALOHA,  which  used  a  very  simple  procedure  called multiple  access 
(MA). 
 
The  method  was  improved  with  the  addition  of  a  procedure  that  forces  the 
station  to  sense  the  medium  before  transmitting.  This was  called carrier  sense 
multiple  access (CSMA).  This  method  later  evolved  into  two  parallel  methods: 
carrier  sense  multiple  access  with  collision  detection  (CSMA/CD), which  tells  the 
station  what  to  do  when  a  collision  is  detected,  and carrier  sense  multiple  access 
with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA), which tries to avoid the collision. 
 
CONTROLLED ACCESS: 
 
In controlled access, the stations consult one another to find which station 
has the right to send. A station cannot send unless it has been authorized by other 
stations. There are three controlled-access methods: 
 
 

 
68 
 

Reservation: In  the reservation method,  a  station  needs  to  make  a 
reservation  before  sending  data.  Time  is  divided  into  intervals.  In  each  interval,  a 
reservation frame precedes the data frames sent in that interval. 
 
If  there  are N stations  in  the  system,  there  are  exactly N reservation 
minislots  in  the  reservation  frame.  Each  minislot  belongs  to  a  station.  When  a 
station needs to send a data frame, it makes a reservation in its own minislot. 
 
The  stations  that  have  made  reservations  can  send  their  data  frames  after 
the reservation frame. Figure 2.12 shows a situation with five stations and a five-
minislot reservation frame. In the first interval, only stations 1, 3, and 4 have made 
reservations. In the second interval, only station 1 has made a reservation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.12: RESERVATION ACCESS METHOD 
 
Polling: Polling works with topologies in which one device is designated as 
a primary  station and  the  other  devices  are secondary  stations. All  data 
exchanges  must  be  made  through the primary  device  even  when  the  ultimate 
destination is a secondary device.  
 
The  primary  device  controls  the  link;  the  secondary  devices  follow  its 
instructions. It is up to the primary device to determine which device is allowed to 
use the channel at a given time. 
 
The primary device, therefore, is always the initiator of a session (see Figure 
2.13).  This  method  uses  poll  and  select  functions  to  prevent  collisions.  However, 
the drawback is if the primary station fails, the system goes down. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69 
 

FIGURE 2.13: SELECT & POLL FUNCTIONS IN POLLING-ACCESS 
 
METHOD 
 
Select: The select function  is  used  whenever  the  primary  device  has 
something to send. Before sending data, the primary creates and transmits a select 
(SEL) frame, one field of which includes the address of the intended secondary. 
 
Poll: The poll function is used by the primary device to solicit transmissions 
from the secondary devices. When the primary is ready to receive data, it must ask 
(poll) each device in turn if it has anything to send. 
 
When the first secondary is approached, it responds either with a NAK frame 
if it has nothing to send or with data (in the form of a data frame) if it does. If the 
response is negative  (a NAK frame), then the primary polls the next secondary  in 
the same manner until it finds one with data to send. 
 
When  the  response  is  positive  (a  data  frame),  the  primary  reads  the  frame 
and returns an acknowledgment (ACK frame), verifying its receipt. 
 
Token  Passing: In  the token-passing method,  the  stations  in  a  network 
are  organized  in  a  logical  ring.  In  other  words,  for  each  station,  there  is  a 
predecessor and a successor.  
 
The predecessor is  the  station  which  is  logically  before  the  station  in  the 
ring; the successor is the station which is after the station in the ring. The current 
station  is  the  one  that  is  accessing  the  channel  now.  The  right  to  this  access  has 
been passed from the predecessor to the current station. The right will be passed to 
the successor when the current station has no more data to send. 
 
But  how  is  the  right  to  access  the  channel  passed  from  one  station  to 
another?  In  this  method,  a  special  packet  called  a token circulates  through  the 
ring. 
 
The possession (meaning control) of the token gives the station the right to 
access  the  channel  and  send  its  data.  When  a  station  has  some  data  to  send,  it 
waits until it receives the token from its predecessor. 
 
It  then  holds  the  token  and  sends  its  data.  When  the  station  has  no  more 
data to send, it releases the token, passing it to the next logical station in the ring. 
The station cannot send data until it receives the token again in the next round. In 
this  process,  when  a  station  receives  the  token  and  has  no  data  to  send,  it  just 
passes the data to the next station. 
 
CHANNELIZATION: 
 
Channelization (or channel  partition, as  it  is  sometimes  called)  is  a 
multiple-access method in which the available bandwidth of a link is shared in time, 
 
70 
 

frequency,   or   through   code,   among   different   stations.   There   are   three 
channelization protocols: FDMA, TDMA, and CDMA. 
 
FDMA: 
 
In frequency-division  multiple  access  (FDMA), the  available  bandwidth 
is divided into frequency bands. Each station is allocated a band to send its data. In 
other  words, each  band  is  reserved  for  a  specific  station,  and  it  belongs  to  the 
station all the time. 
 
Each  station  also  uses  a  band  pass  filter  to  confine  the  transmitter 
frequencies.  To  prevent  station  interferences,  the  allocated  bands  are  separated 
from one another by small guard bands. 
 
FDMA  specifies  a  predetermined  frequency  band  for  the  entire  period  of 
communication. This means that stream data (a continuous flow of data that may 
not be packetized) can easily be used with FDMA. 
 
We   need   to   emphasize   that   although   FDMA   and   frequency-division 
multiplexing (FDM) conceptually seem similar, there are differences between them. 
 
FDM  is  a  physical  layer  technique  that  combines  the  loads  from  low 
bandwidth channels and transmits them by using a high-bandwidth channel. 
 
FDMA,  on  the  other  hand,  is  an access method  in  the  data-link  layer.  The 
datalink  layer  in  each  station  tells  its physical  layer  to  make  a  bandpass  signal 
from the data passed to it. The signal must be created in the allocated band. 
 
TDMA: 
 
In time-division   multiple   access   (TDMA), the   stations   share   the 
bandwidth of the channel in time. Each station is allocated a time slot during which 
it can send data. Each station transmits its data in its assigned time slot. 
 
The  main  problem  with  TDMA  lies  in  achieving  synchronization  between  the 
different  stations.  Each  station  needs  to  know  the  beginning  of  its  slot  and  the 
location of its slot. This may be difficult because of propagation delays introduced in 
the system if the stations are spread over a large area. 
 
To compensate for the delays, we can insert guard times. Synchronization is 
normally  accomplished  by  having  some  synchronization  bits  (normally  referred  to 
as preamble bits) at the beginning of each slot. 
 
We   also   need   to   emphasize   that   although   TDMA   and time-division 
multiplexing  (TDM)  conceptually  seem  the  same,  there  are  differences  between 
them. 
 
 
 
71 
 

TDM  is  a  physical  layer  technique  that  combines  the  data  from  slower 
channels and transmits them by using a faster channel. The process uses a physical 
multiplexer that interleaves data units from each channel. 
 
TDMA,  on  the  other  hand,  is  an  access  method  in  the  data-link  layer.  The 
data-link layer in each station tells its physical layer to use the allocated time slot. 
There is no physical multiplexer at the physical layer. 
 
CDMA: 
 
Code-division    multiple    access    (CDMA) was   conceived   (meaning 
imagine/visualize)  several  decades  ago.  Recent  advances  in  electronic  technology 
have finally made its implementation possible. 
 
CDMA  differs  from  FDMA  in  that  only  one  channel  occupies  the  entire 
bandwidth  of  the  link.  It  differs  from  TDMA  in  that  all  stations  can  send  data 
simultaneously;   there   is   no   timesharing.   In   CDMA,   one  channel   carries   all 
transmissions simultaneously.  
 
CONNECTING DEVICES AND VIRTUAL LAN’S 
 
Hosts  or  LANs  do  not  normally  operate  in  isolation.  They  are  connected  to 
one  another  or  to  the  Internet.  To  connect  hosts  or  LANs,  we  use  connecting 
devices. Connecting devices can operate in different layers of the Internet model. 
 
CONNECTING DEVICES: 
 
Hosts and networks do not normally operate in isolation. We use connecting 
devices to  connect  hosts together to  make  a  network  or  to  connect  networks 
together to make an internet. Connecting devices can operate in different layers of 
the Internet model. 
 
We  discuss  three  kinds  of connecting  devices: hubs, link-layer  switches, 
and routers. 
 
Hubs  today  operate  in  the  first  layer  of  the  Internet  model.  Link-layer 
switches  operate  in  the  first  two  layers.  Routers  operate  in  the  first  three  layers. 
(See Figure 2.14) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72 
 

FIGURE 2.14: THREE CATEGORIES OF CONNECTING DEVICES 
 
HUBS: A hub is  a  device  that  operates  only  in  the  physical  layer.  Signals 
that  carry  information  within  a  network  can  travel  a  fixed  distance  before 
attenuation endangers the integrity of the data. A repeater receives a signal and, 
before it becomes  too weak or corrupted, regenerates and retimes the original bit 
pattern. 
 
The  repeater  then  sends  the  refreshed  signal.  In  the  past,  when  Ethernet 
LANs were using bus topology, a repeater was used to connect two segments of a 
LAN  to  overcome  the  length  restriction  of  the  coaxial  cable.  Today,  however, 
Ethernet LANs use star topology. 
 
In  a  star  topology,  a  repeater  is  a  multiport  device,  often  called  a hub  that 
can  be  used  to  serve  as  the  connecting  point  and  at  the  same  time  function  as  a 
repeater. 
 
Figure 2.15 shows that when a packet from station A to station B arrives at 
the  hub,  the  signal  representing  the  frame  is  regenerated  to  remove  any  possible 
corrupting noise, but the hub forwards the packet from all outgoing ports except 
The one from which the signal was received   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.15: A HUB 
 
In  other  words,  the  frame  is  broadcast.  All  stations  in  the  LAN  receive  the 
frame,  but  only  station  B  keeps  it.  The  rest  of  the  stations  discard  it.  Figure  2.15 
shows the role of a repeater or a hub in a switched LAN. A repeater has no filtering 
capability. 
 
A hub or a repeater is a physical-layer device. They do not have a link-layer 
address  and  they  do not  check  the  link-layer  address of  the  received  frame.  They 
just regenerate the corrupted bits and send them out from every port. 
 
Link-Layer  Switches: A link-layer  switch (or switch)  operates  in  both 
the physical and the data-link layers. As a physical-layer device, it regenerates the 
signal  it  receives.  As  a  link-layer  device,  the  link-layer  switch  can  check  the  MAC 
addresses (source and destination) contained in the frame. 
 
Filtering: 
 
 
73 
 