

Unit-4: Network Layer 
 Introduction 
The network Layer controls the operation of the subnet. The main aim of this layer 
is to deliver packets from source to destination across multiple links (networks). If 
two computers (system) are connected on the same link, then there is no need for a 
network layer. It routes the signal through different channels to the other end and 
acts as a network controller. 
It also divides the outgoing messages into packets and to assemble incoming 
packets into messages for higher levels. 
In broadcast networks, the routing problem is simple, so the network layer is often 
thin or even non-existent. 
Functions of Network Layer 
1. It translates logical network address into physical address. Concerned with 
circuit, message or packet switching. 
2. Routers and gateways operate in the network layer. Mechanism is provided 
by Network Layer for routing the packets to final destination. 
3. Connection services are provided including network layer flow control, 
network layer error control and packet sequence control. 
4. Breaks larger packets into small packets. 
 
 
 

 Virtual and Datagram Network 
In the network layer, these services are host-to-host services provided by the 
network layer for the transport layer. In the transport layer these services are 
process-to-process services provided by the transport layer for the application 
layer. 
In all major computer network architectures to date (Internet, ATM, frame relay 
and so on), the network layer provides either host-to-host connectionless service or 
host-to-host connection service, but not both.  
 Computer networks that provide only a connection service at the network 
layer are called virtual circuit (VC) networks 
 Computer networks that provide only a connectionless service at the 
network layer are called datagram networks. 
The implementations of connection oriented service in the transport layer and the 
connection service in the network layer are fundamentally different. We already 
know that the transport-layer connection-oriented service is implemented at the 
edge of the network in the end systems; we’ll see shortly that the network-layer 
connection service is implemented in the routers in the network core as well as in 
the end systems. 
Virtual circuit and datagram networks are two fundamental classes of computer 
networks. They use very different information in making their forwarding decision. 
Let’s now take a closer look at their implementations. 
Virtual Circuit Networks 
While the internet is a datagram network, many alternative network architectures – 
including those of ATM (Asynchronous  Transfer Mode) and frame relay – are 
virtual circuit networks and, therefore, use connections at the network layer. These 
network layer connections are called virtual circuits (VCs). Let’s now consider 
how a VC service can be implemented in a computer network. 
A VC consists of : 

a path (that is , a series of links and routers) between the source and destination 
hosts, 
VC numbers, one number for each link along the path, andentries in the forwarding 
table n each router along the path. 
A packet belonging to a virtual circuit will carry a VC number in its header. 
Because a virtual circuit may have a different VC number on each link, each 
intervening router must replace the VC number of each traversing packet with a 
new VC number. The new VC number is obtained from the forwarding table. 
To illustrate the concept, consider the network shown in the figure below: 
 
The numbers next to links of R1 in the above figure are the link interface numbers. 
Suppose now that Host A requests that the network establish a VC between itself 
and Host B. Suppose also that the network chooses the path A-R1-R2-B and 
assigns VC numbers 12, 22, and 32 to the three links in this path for this virtual 
circuit. In this case, when a packet in this VC leaves Host A, the value in the VC 
number filed in the packet header is 12; when it leaves R1, the value is 22; and 
when it leaves R2, the value is 32. 
How does the router determine the replacement VC number for a packet traversing 
the router? For a VC network, each router’s forwarding table includes VC number 
translation; for example the forwarding table in R1 might look something like the 
table below 
Whenever a new VC is established across a router, an entry is added to the 
forwarding table. Similarly, whenever a VC terminates, the appropriate entries in 
each table along its path are removed. 

You might be wondering why a packet doesn’t just keep the same VC number on 
each of the links along its route. The answer is twofold. First, replacing the number 
from the link reduces the length of the VC field in the packet header. Second, and 
more importantly, VC setup is considerably simplified by permitting a different 
VC number at each link along the path of the VC. Specifically, with multiple VC 
numbers, each link in the path can choose a VC number independently of the VC 
numbers chosen at other links along the path. If a common VC number were 
required for all links along the path, the routers would have to exchange and 
process a substantial number of messages to agree on a common VC number (e.g. 
one that is not being used by any other existing VC at these routers) to be used for 
a connection. 
In a VC network, the network’s routers must maintain connection state 
information for the ongoing connections. Specifically, each time a new connection 
is established across a router, a new connection entry must be added to the router’s 
forwarding table; and each time a connection is released an entry must be removed 
from the table. Note that even if there is no VC number translation, it is still 
necessary to maintain connection state information that associates VC numbers 
with output interface numbers. The issue of whether or not a router maintains 
connection state information for each ongoing connection is a crucial one. 
 IP Protocol & Addressing  
 If a device wants to communicate using TCP/IP, it needs an IP address. When the 
device has an IP address and the appropriate software and hardware, it can send 
and receive IP packets. Any device that can send and receive IP packets is called 
an IP host.  
IP addresses consist of a 32-bit number, usually written in dotted-decimal notation. 
Each decimal number in an IP address is called an octet. The term octet is just a 
vendor- neutral term for byte . Finally, note that each network interface uses a 
unique IP address. Most people tend to think that their computer has an IP address, 
but actually their computer’s network card has an IP address. If you put two 
Ethernet cards in a PC to forward IP packets through both cards, they both would 
need unique IP addresses.  
RFC 791 defines the IP protocol, including several different classes of networks. 
IP defines three different network classes for addresses used by individual hosts—
addresses called unicast Ip addresses. These three network classes are called A, B, 

and C. TCP/IP defines Class D (multicast) addresses and Class E (experimental) 
addresses as well.  
Class A, B, or C network have the same numeric value network portion of the 
addresses. The rest of the address is called the host portion of the address.  
IP Add. 0.0.0.0 is reserved for the default network.  
IP Add. 255.255.255.255 is Used for Broadcast.  
Class A – Network. Host. Host. Host  
Subnet mask - 255.0.0.0  
Range - 1 to 126  
1.0.0.0 to 126.0.0.0  
Loop back Address- 127.0.0.1  
That is designated for the Software loop back interface of a machine. The loop 
back interface has no hardware associated with it & it is not physically connected 
to network.  
Class B – Network. Network . Host. Host  
Subnet mask - 255.255.0.0  
Range – 128 to 191  
128.1.0.0 191.254.0.0  
Class C – Network. Network . Network . Host  
Subnet mask - 255.255.255.0  
Range – 192 to 223  
192.0.1.0 223.255.254.0  
Class D – Multicast Addressing  
Range- 224 to 239  
224.0.0.5 & 224.0.0.6 OSPF Protocol.  
224.0.0.9 RIPv2 Protocol.  
224.0.0.10 EIGRP Protocol.  
Other valid IP address using for Video Confer sing.  
Class E- Experimental Address Range- 240 to 255.  
 
Private IP Address Range –  
In that IP address uniquely assign to particular computer. This address provide for 
(ISP). In the Internet addressing architecture, a private network is a network that 
uses private IP address space, These addresses are commonly used for home, 
office, and enterprise local area networks (LANs), These addresses are 
characterized as private because they are not globally delegated, meaning they are 
not allocated to any specific organization, and IP packets addressed by them cannot 
be transmitted onto the public Internet.  

The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) has directed the Internet 
Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) to reserve the following IPv4 address 
ranges for private networks.  
Class A - 10.0.0.0 – 10.255.255.255  
Class B - 172.16.0.0 – 172.31.255.255  
Class C - 192.168.0.0 – 192.168.255.255  
 
 
 Router 
Like bridges, routers are devices whose primary purpose is to connect two or more  
networks and to filter network signals so that only desired information travels 
between them. For  
example, routers are often used to regulate the flow of information between school 
networks and the Internet. However, routers can inspect a good deal more 
information than bridges, and they  
therefore can regulate network traffic more precisely. They also have another 
important capability: they are aware of many possible paths across the network and 
can choose the best one for each data packet to travel.  
Features of Router :-  
1) Multiple Active Paths  
2) Identify address  
3) Traffic Management  
4) Sharing information  
5) Filtering bad data  
6) Performance  
1) Multiple Active Paths:  
Routers are able to keep track of multiple active paths between any given source 
and  
destination network.  
This makes it more flexible and active towards faults than bridge.  
This is because in a bridge multiple online active paths are not allowed.  
2) Identify address:  

Routers work on Network layer and can access more information from packet than 
bridge.  
Router can identify source and destination network addresses within packet.  
3) Traffic Management:  
Router provides excellent traffic management using intelligent path selection.  
Router select the best route, which is based on traffic loads, line speeds, number of 
one  
attached to another router.  
4) Sharing information:  
Router can share status and routing information with other routers. Routers can 
communicate  
with each other by doing this they can listen to network and identify which 
connections are  
busy and which are not.  
5)Filtering bad data:  
Routers do not forward any information that does not have a correct network 
address. This is  
the reason they don’t forward bad data.  
6)Performance:  
Routers perform complex task and it is continuously busy to execute network data.  
This means they are slower than bridge because they keep processing data 
intensively.  
Types of Routing :-  
There are two types of routers 1.Static Router 2.Dynamic Router  
1) Static Router :-  
Each router has its own software called ‘Routing Table’. Administrator is a person 
who configures and maintains whole network as well as networking devices.  
Administrators have to manually configure routes between each network when the 
routers do  
not communicate amongst themselves that type of routers are called static routers.  
Its advantage is that complete control remains with the network administrator.  
2) Dynamic Router :-  
Dynamic routers are those routers, which automatically find their own routes by  
communicating with each other.  
These routers are self configured. This is because their routing tables are built and 
modified through these communications and these changes are quickly reflected. 
e.g. router failure PR broken links. 
 
 Routing algorithm 

In order to transfer the packets from source to the destination, the network layer 
must determine the best route through which packets can be transmitted. 
Whether the network layer provides datagram service or virtual circuit service, the 
main job of the network layer is to provide the best route. The routing protocol 
provides this job. 
The routing protocol is a routing algorithm that provides the best path from the 
source to the destination. The best path is the path that has the "least-cost path" 
from source to the destination. 
Routing is the process of forwarding the packets from source to the destination but 
the best route to send the packets is determined by the routing algorithm. 
Classification of a Routing algorithm 
The Routing algorithm is divided into two categories: 
Adaptive Routing algorithm 
Non-adaptive Routing algorithm 
 
Adaptive Routing algorithm 
An adaptive routing algorithm is also known as dynamic routing algorithm. 
This algorithm makes the routing decisions based on the topology and network 
traffic. 
The main parameters related to this algorithm are hop count, distance and 
estimated transit time. 

An adaptive routing algorithm can be classified into three parts: 
Centralized algorithm: It is also known as global routing algorithm as it computes 
the least-cost path between source and destination by using complete and global 
knowledge about the network. This algorithm takes the connectivity between the 
nodes and link cost as input, and this information is obtained before actually 
performing any calculation. Link state algorithm is referred to as a centralized 
algorithm since it is aware of the cost of each link in the network. 
Isolation algorithm: It is an algorithm that obtains the routing information by using 
local information rather than gathering information from other nodes. 
Distributed algorithm: It is also known as decentralized algorithm as it computes 
the least-cost path between source and destination in an iterative and distributed 
manner. In the decentralized algorithm, no node has the knowledge about the cost 
of all the network links. In the beginning, a node contains the information only 
about its own directly attached links and through an iterative process of calculation 
computes the least-cost path to the destination. A Distance vector algorithm is a 
decentralized algorithm as it never knows the complete path from source to the 
destination, instead it knows the direction through which the packet is to be 
forwarded along with the least cost path. 
 
Non-Adaptive Routing algorithm 
Non Adaptive routing algorithm is also known as a static routing algorithm. 
When booting up the network, the routing information stores to the routers. 
Non Adaptive routing algorithms do not take the routing decision based on the 
network topology or network traffic. 
The Non-Adaptive Routing algorithm is of two types: 
Flooding: In case of flooding, every incoming packet is sent to all the outgoing 
links except the one from it has been reached. The disadvantage of flooding is that 
node may contain several copies of a particular packet. 

Random walks: In case of random walks, a packet sent by the node to one of its 
neighbors randomly. An advantage of using random walks is that it uses the 
alternative routes very efficiently. 
Broadcast and Multicast Routing 
When a device has multiple paths to reach a destination, it always selects one path 
by preferring it over others. This selection process is termed as Routing. Routing is 
done by special network devices called routers or it can be done by means of 
software processes. The software based routers have limited functionality and 
limited scope. 
A router is always configured with some default route. A default route tells the 
router where to forward a packet if there is no route found for specific destination. 
In case there are multiple path existing to reach the same destination, router can 
make decision based on the following information: 
 Hop Count 
 Bandwidth 
 Metric 
 Prefix-length 
 Delay 
Routes can be statically configured or dynamically learnt. One route can be 
configured to be preferred over others. 
Unicast routing 
Most of the traffic on the internet and intranets known as unicast data or unicast 
traffic is sent with specified destination. Routing unicast data over the internet is 
called unicast routing. It is the simplest form of routing because the destination is 
already known. Hence the router just has to look up the routing table and forward 
the packet to next hop. 

 
Broadcast routing 
By default, the broadcast packets are not routed and forwarded by the routers on 
any network. Routers create broadcast domains. But it can be configured to 
forward broadcasts in some special cases. A broadcast message is destined to all 
network devices. 
Broadcast routing can be done in two ways (algorithm): 
 A router creates a data packet and then sends it to each host one by one. In 
this case, the router creates multiple copies of single data packet with 
different destination addresses. All packets are sent as unicast but because 
they are sent to all, it simulates as if router is broadcasting. 
This method consumes lots of bandwidth and router must destination 
address of each node. 
 Secondly, when router receives a packet that is to be broadcasted, it simply 
floods those packets out of all interfaces. All routers are configured in the 
same way. 

 
This method is easy on router's CPU but may cause the problem of duplicate 
packets received from peer routers. 
Reverse path forwarding is a technique, in which router knows in advance 
about its predecessor from where it should receive broadcast. This technique 
is used to detect and discard duplicates. 
Multicast Routing 
Multicast routing is special case of broadcast routing with significance difference 
and challenges. In broadcast routing, packets are sent to all nodes even if they do 
not want it. But in Multicast routing, the data is sent to only nodes which wants to 
receive the packets. 

 
The router must know that there are nodes, which wish to receive multicast packets 
(or stream) then only it should forward. Multicast routing works spanning tree 
protocol to avoid looping. 
Multicast routing also uses reverse path Forwarding technique, to detect and 
discard duplicates and loops. 
 
 